an searcn oI the source o1 this ucc
mighty river. these geologists draw our
attention
to
the Tons
basin where
quartzite and metamorphic rocks abound.
They then aver: 'All the evidences point
to only one conclusion that the present
day Tons was in fact Vedic Sarasvati in
ts upper reaches." (ibid.. p.16).

Some Thoughts on The Nou-Dry River on whose Bank Stands the Site of Kalibangan

Aiter a urther study of the region,
these geologists produced a map which
shows that the ultimate sources for this
Vedic Sarasvati were what are known
today as the Sarasvati, Jamadar. Supin
and Manjee Glaciers, supplemented by
Rupin and Nargani Glaciers. All these
glaciers melted near Naitwar and the
river thus formed moved first in a
southwesterly direction and then in the
westerly. Breaking through the Siwaliks
near Adh Badri. it finally made its mighty
descent on the plains (Fig. 2.3). This. in
brief. is the story of perennial water
supply to the once mighty Sarasvati which
is now represented by mere dry beds.
though. as already stated. these are at
places a wide as 6-8 kilometres.

HOW AND WHEN DID THE SARASVATI
DRY UP?

a very relevant quesuon mal may now
be asked: If the Sarasvati was such a
mighty river, how did it dry up?
The
answer. again. had to be sought through
an investigation of the Himalayan Terrain.
which the afore-mentioned geologists.
Puri and Verma. verily did. According to
them. there took place a major seismic
upheaval in the Himalayas, as a result of
which there arose the Bata-Markanda
Divide, nearly 30 metres in height (Fig.
2.4).
It blocked the passage of the
Sarasvati, which could 1o longer flow
westwards.
Since water must lind ts
way out. it llowed backwards and. taking
advantage of the Yamuna Tear opening.

Robert Kaikes. 1968. Kalibangan: Death from Natural Causes. Antiquity. X 86 9 -

oined the Yamuni nver. Thus ended the
glorious history of the
river
long-
venerated by the Rigvedie Aryans.

In this context attention must be
drawn to some very telling evidence from
the Ghaggar-Sarasvati bed itself at
here were in progress. we were naturally
keen on verifying locally the facts about
the drying up of the river. since it was
obvious to us that the massive settlement
at Kalibangan could not have flourished
without the adjacent river having been
alive and active. With this end in view. a
project. combining the efforts of the
Archaeological Survey of India, Geological
Survey of India represented by Shri R.K.
Karanth) and an Italian firm named
Raikes and Partners theaded by Mr. R.L.
Raikes) was set in motion. Four bore-holes
were dug. one of which lay in between
KLB-1 and KLB-2. though close to the
river-bank (Fig- 2.5), and three in the
river-bed itself. located at a distance of
300 metres from onc another towards the
most revealing fact was that the greyish
sand encountered in these bore-holes. at
a depth of about 1Im below the present
flood- plain, was very similar n mineral
content to that found in the bed of the
present-day Yamuna. * This confirms the
lindings of Puri and Verma that the source
of the Ghaggar Sarasvati) lay high up in
the Himalayas from where the Yamuna
also originated. thus making the sand
Raikes has very aptly captioned his paper
from Natural causes. the Harappan
settlement at Kalibangan came to a
sudden end because of the drying up of
the Ghaggar. even though it was still in
a Mature stage and not decaying and
Kalibangan.
When the excavations over
centre of the bed.
All things apart. the
similar in both the cases.
Further. as
just referred to. viz.
Kalibangan: Death
ending up in a normal process.



