Block Type 0:
This Part-1 on the Harappans throws light on chronology: three- mounds concept
of the settlement: fortified citadel and city: stratigraphy and structures: chess-
board plan of the city: ritual platform. fire-altars, wells: representative pottery.
plain as well as decorated. with their design-repertoire: cylindrical seal. square
seals and sealings, with scientific studies of steatite seals: crafts and industries.

In fact, after the partition (in 1947) extensive explorations were carried out in
various places to search Harappan sites in India, since both the major Harappan
sites, Mohenjodaro and Harappa, remained with the present-day Pakistan. Kalibangan
was the first Harappan site which was explored and subsequently excavated after
Independence. in 1960-69.

However. for this long-pending report and its enormous delay. the senior author.
Prof. B. B. Lal, states in the Preface of the book: "Better Late than Never. The
completion of the report has only been possible due to painstaking approach of the
authors, after their retirements: Prof. B. B. Lal and Late Shri Jagat Pati Joshi. both
former Directors General of Archaeological Survey of India.

have great pleasure in placeing on record my appreciation of my colleagues in
the Archacological Survey of India, for their joint efforts for the completion of the
report. My special thanks are due to Dr. B. R. Mani. Additional Director General.
Dr. D. N. Dimri. Director Publication), Shri Daljit Singh. superintending
Archacologist Publication), Shri Vishnu Kant, Assistant Superintending
Archacologist, Delhi Circle, Dr. Sujeet Nayan, Assistant Superintending Archaeologist
(Publication). Shri Hoshiar Singh. Production Oflicer Publication). Shri Abinash
Mohanty. Assistant Archaeologist and others who have provided assistance with
ardent zeal in bringing out this publication. M/s. Aravall Printers, New Delhi, deserve
my thanks for their co-operation and publishing this book.

The excavations at Kalibangan have undoubtedly produced very good results
and established Fabric A to F in pottery. added a unique finding of the earliest
ploughed field from the early Harappan period and traces of earliest earthquake
marking the end of the early Harappan and Harappan. Scale, cylindrical seal, charging
bull. inscribed pottery. fire-alters, wells, bathing platforms, linga-with-yoni, plumb
bob, etc. are the noteworthy findings, along with the plans of citadel, the city and
burial ground. from Harappan Perlod.

- am very greatly delighted to present to scholars the second book entitled
Excavations at Kalibangan: The Harappan, Part-1. which embodies the account of
valuable contributions of the excavations. In this series the first book on Early
Harappans had already been published in 2003 by the Archacological Survey of
India as Memoir No 98.

The academic community which has eagerly been waiting for this report for a
long time will surely welcome it.



Block Type 1:
(Rakesh Tewari)
Director General
Archaeological Survey of India

Place: New
D elhi
Date:
- 31/01/2015

. REV W
DRD



Block Type 2:

LaDan
(Rakesh Tewari)
Director General
Archaeological Survey of India

Place: New
D elhi
Date:
31/01/2015



Block Type 4:

LaDaw
(Rakesh Tewari)
Director General
Archaeological Survey of India



